Hello.
Welcome to this module about the unit testing.
After having been introduced to the main concepts that are used by
testing and having introduced our application,
we'll move now to discuss unit testing in more detail and to
effectively test the individual units and components of our
flights management application.
We'll also add new features that will be individually tested.
So let's move further.
This module will focus on showing what unit testing means,
which its main advantages are,
and how to make the step to an application that is using unit testing.
First, we'll review the unit testing benefits.
It helps us writing safer code, it also helps to find bugs early.
The programmer can quickly isolate the incorrect code.
It facilitates the introduction of new functionality
without affecting the existing one,
and it is a piece of the application documentation.
We'll discuss the concept of code coverage as one of the
important metrics of successful testing.
We'll see that it can ensure some of the quality of our programming,
but it is also controversial metrics,
and one good programmer should be able to see beyond the
pure percentage obtained by running tests.
We'll then start to move the existing flights management
application to unit testing with JUnit5 looking for the
verification of its correct behavior.
Finally, we'll add new features and we'll make sure that they are unit tested.
By using unit tests, you'll be able to write safer code.
You will know that your methods and components are really
doing what they are supposed to do.
Having tests will make you think harder about the code and about if
it is really doing what it is supposed to do.
It identifies the issues that may exist before the code is
sent further for integration testing and unit test will also
help exposing the edge cases,
the problems or situations that occur only at an extreme,
maximum, or minimum operating parameter.
With unit testing, bugs are found at an early stage.
Issues can be found very early and can be quickly resolved
without impacting the other pieces of the code.
Since unit testing is carried out by developers who test
individual code before integration.
This includes both bugs in the programmer's implementation and flaws
or missing parts of the specification for the unit.
And even if the developer has discovered the bug,
now he is facing another challenge, which is the piece of code that produces it,
how to be able to isolate those lines that are generating it.
How we can find that magic that will identify the incorrect code
as tried as possible that will tell us that we are going the
wrong way and not continue further,
but to inspect a small portion of the application that
is at the origin of the bad behavior.
The well-written tests are the expected answer.
Once the developer has received some specifications,
he will have to first understand them before being able to put
them into the code and a living application will receive requests
for implementing new functionality.
In order to be able to implement them, you have to answer the question,
what behavior must I follow?
What if I will first implement the test that will show me what I have to do,
then I may think about how I have to do it.
This is the fact one of the fundamental principles of test-driven development.
Once you work on the new application, you will probably like.
In order to easily jump into it, get your hands on some documentation.
At least, you need to understand the fundamental idea,
what is this software supposed to do,
but if you need to check what some class or its methods intend to do,
what do you prefer,
to read some more documentation or to look for some
sample code that already invokes it.
And if you have to support your work,
how much will you enjoy writing documentation?
Most programmers prefer to work with the code and this is pretty natural.
Well-written unit tests do exactly this,
they invoke your code, and consequently,
they provide the working specification of your functionality.
As a result,
unit tests effectively become a significant portion
of the thing called documentation.
Code coverage is a measure used to describe the degree to which the source code
of a program is executed when a particular test suite runs.
A program with high test coverage measured as a percentage has more
of its source code executed during testing will suggest it has a
lower chance of containing and detecting software bugs compared to a
program with low test coverage.
Many different metrics can be used to calculate this coverage.
Some of the most basic are the percentage of program methods and the percentage
of program lines called during execution of the test suite.
The metric is built by a tool that runs the test suite and analyzes
the code that is effectively executed as result.
Among the most widely used code coverage tools, let's enumerate the few ones.
JCov originally developed and used with Sun JDK and later
Oracle JDK from the very beginning of Java.
OpenClover as a free and open source successor of Atlassian Clover,
which reached its end of life in 2017.
EMMA as open source toolkit for measuring and reporting.
It is no longer under active development as JaCoCo
has been designed to replace it, however,
it is still popular and pretty large in use.
JaCoCo, an open source toolkit, initially developed as a plugin for Eclipse.
At the time of the recording of this module,
the last table release has come just three days earlier.
Consequently, from the few existing alternatives,
we'll use JaCoCo for our demos as having good integration
with Maven and under continuous development.
Speaking about the level of code coverage that is achievable,
one legitimate question that can come to your mind may be
what code coverage is really feasible, 80%,
90%, or 100%.
From my experience,
80% is the minimum percentage that is required by most of the projects.
Most customers and technical leads consider this as a minimum in
order to accept that delivered code is reliable.
It is usually included into the definition of done.
Ninety percent is in most cases achievable,
but it may require some extra efforts and artifices to be truly feasible.
The last few percent may be in many cases the hardest ones
and the difference between 85% and 90% may be much larger
than the 1 between 80% and 85%.
Finally, 100% should be our goal.
It is not a rare situation that even if you achieve 90% of code coverage,
the rest of 10% on tested code to hide critical box.
It is not possible in all situations,
but 100% should be the target to keep in mind and to
try to get as close as possible.
For our demo, we'll add the JaCoCo Maven plugin to build a configuration.
Then a JaCoCo agent will run when the tests are run.
It will be this agent that will collect the coverage information.
Looking the way you can see at this slide,
when we get information at the level of the class,
or on this slide where we get the information at the level of methods and lines,
or on this slide,
where we get the most detailed information at the level of
particular class or a particular method.
One of our goals will be to keep an appropriate level of code coverage so
that will provide us the desired safety about our code.
And the bad news is that this may still not be enough.
One hundred percent code coverage does not mean your code works perfectly.
Surprising?
It should not be because of at least to resist.
The first reason is that your tests may not be good
enough and the second reason is that, remember,
we are still at the level of unit testing.
It means that you are testing units meaning classes and their methods.
You are testing neither the interaction between different classes nor
the possible scenarios for using the application.
These topics are one step forward of our discussion and they relate to the ideas of integration testing and behavior-driven development.